In this lecture, I want to take a moment to talk about full site editing for over a year.
WordPress has teased a different way of building themes.
The time has finally come in.
WordPress 5.9 full site editing was introduced into the core.
It completely changes how sites are designed and developed.
To understand why full site editing was introduced as a feature, we need to wind the clocks back.
Prior to full site editing.
We had classic site editing for modifying the appearance of a site.
Classic site editing is a term used to describe the suite of tools for modifying WordPress.
Primarily, we had two tools called the customizer and a whizzy wig editor.
While they're simple, they're not great for designing a site.
It's difficult to design an interface that allows users to modify elements on a page.
Both tools could not meet the demands of regular and technical users.
For that reason, page builders were introduced into the WordPress ecosystem.
In fact, they're so popular, it's become a multimillion dollar industry beaver builder, Devi Elementary,
visual composer and Oxygene are some examples.
One of the benefits of using a page builder is the low barrier to entry.
It's possible to create a beautiful site with minimal knowledge of HTML and CSS.
This can be great for clients.
Unfortunately, page builders have their downsides.
Firstly, they're expensive.
Secondly, you need to deal with managing licenses.
Lastly, there isn't a unified standard for building pages.
Every page builder approaches things differently.
Once you pick a page builder, you're locked in.
The team behind WordPress decided to introduce a better editing experience to the core by creating Gutenberg.
Originally, Gutenberg could only be used for editing posts.
The team fully realized that Gutenberg could transcend its original purpose to being a page builder,
hence the idea of full site editing.
By adding full site editing, every corner of a template is editable.
You can build headers, footers, sidebars and content areas with blocks.
Best of all, it addresses the issues present in modern day page builders.
Firstly, it's free.
No need to open your wallet for anybody.
Secondly, you don't need to manage licenses.
Lastly, it introduces the standard for building pages.
That's just the tip of the iceberg.
There's a lot to explore with the page builder.
However, I would be lying if I said everything is sunshine and roses.
There are downsides to full site editing.
The main drawback of full site editing is the development experience.
Unfortunately, we've received the short end of the stick.
WordPress development was known to be easy.
You could create a custom theme and plugin within hours.
Things have changed.
The requirements for developing custom themes and plugins have risen.
Typically you could get away with PHP.
However, Gutenberg development requires knowledge of JavaScript and react.
The learning curve has gotten steeper, but hey, that's why you're taking this course.
We are going to fully embrace full site editing.
Love it or hate it.
Full site editing is the way to go.
With that said, let's get into full site editing.
I'll see you in the next lecture.